Hi, this is David from MinuteEarth.
Suppose you’re a mad scientist and - like
any good supervillain - you want to take over
the world with an army of cloned supersoldiers.
Welp, waaay before you have to tackle all
the ethical and economic and infrastructural
problems that come with leading a clone army,
you’re gonna run into a major science problem.
Because of the way DNA works, it’s super-hard
to make even one clone, and it’s almost
impossible to make a clone army.
The idea behind making a clone is simple:
rather than the birds and the bees method
of mixing a sperm cell’s half set of DNA
with an egg cell’s half set of DNA to form
a fertilized egg, also called a zygote, you
instead take a full set of DNA from another
body cell, and use it to replace the DNA of
an egg cell in order to form a clone zygote.
Because the clone zygote contains a full set
of DNA just like the regular zygote does,
you might expect it to DIVIDE AND turn into
an embryo just like a regular zygote does
too... but - most of the time - it won’t.
Cloned zygotes are not reliable because while
all other cells in the body do contain a full
set of DNA, these other cells optimize their
DNA to best serve their own particular functions.
The cells stick little “do not use” tags
on certain unnecessary genes or otherwise
tangle them up into out-of-the-way balls.
This specialization makes DNA from non-sex
cells particularly unsuited for cloning purposes
because those tags and tangles make it hard
for the clone zygote to divide.
And while there ARE enzymes that de-tag and
de-tangle the DNA from sperm and eggs to enable
the good old-fashioned making of babies, when
they try to de-tag and de-tangle DNA from
another cell in a clone zygote, they do a
pretty haphazard job.
As a result, almost every time a zygote tries
to divide,the process malfunctions.
Every once in a great while, though, the tags
and tangles left behind for some reason don’t
stop the embryo from growing; Hello, Dolly
… or hello, supersoldier clone.
But that’s just one extra supersoldier;
if you really want to ramp up your clone army
production - especially if your original supersoldier
dies of old age as you make failed clone after
failed clone - you’ll need to figure out
how to make a clone of a clone, and that’s
currently a no go.
Because while your supersoldier clone may
look like your original supersoldier, its
baseline DNA already has some extra tags and
tangles, and as its cells specialize, that
tagged and tangled DNA will only get taggier
and tanglier.
So when you try to clone your clone, that
DNA will be the taggiest and tangliest, which
means that the enzymes will have no hope of
untagging and untangling it.
Except...some scientists - the non-mad kind
- recently identified a super-enzyme that
can handle multiple generations worth of tagged
and tangled DNA which is exactly what you’d
need to make not just a clone or a clone of
a clone, but a clone of a clone of a clone
of a clone of a clone of a clone of a clone...whew.
This technique only seems to work in certain
rodents, though, so your clone army will just
have to wait - unless, of course, your original
supersoldier is less a bounty hunter and more
a mouse-y hunter.
It’s hard to clone a living thing; it’s
even harder to clone something extinct - like
a mammoth!
But you can learn how scientists plan to do
it over at The Great Courses Plus, which sponsored
this video.
The Great Courses Plus is like Netflix for
learning, with a library of more than 11,000
lectures, including an Introduction to Paleontology
course that details the race to reconstruct
- and clone - the mammoth genome.
In addition to science content, you can check
out courses on cooking, art appreciation,
and destressing your life...which sounds pretty
good right now.
To get a free trial subscription to The Great
Courses Plus and show your support for MinuteEarth,
go to TheGreatCoursesPlus.com/minuteearth,
or click the link in the description below.
Thanks Great Courses Plus!
Also, congrats to our latest caption contest
winner.
The next image is ready for awesome caption
suggestions from all levels of Patrons at
Patreon.com/MinuteEarth.